Mathematical epidemiology: Past, present, and future

We give a brief outline of some of the important aspects of the development of mathematical epidemiology.

---FULL TEXT (fetched)---

Introduction
Communicable diseases have always been an important part of human history. Since the beginning of recorded history there have been epidemics that have invaded populations, often causing many deaths before disappearing, possibly recurring years later, possibly diminishing in severity as populations develop some immunity. For example, the “Spanish” flu epidemic of 1918–19 caused more than 50,000,000 deaths worldwide, and there are annual influenza seasonal epidemics that cause up to 35,000 deaths worldwide.
The Black Deaths (probably bubonic plague) spread from Asia throughout Europe in several waves during the fourteenth century, beginning in 1346, and is estimated to have caused the death of as much as one-third of the population of Europe between 1346 and 1350. The disease recurred regularly in various parts of Europe for more than 300 years, notably as the Great Plague of London of 1665–1666. It then gradually withdrew from Europe.
Stochastic models
There are serious shortcomings in the simple Kermack-McKendrick model as a description of the beginning of a disease outbreak, and a very different kind of model is required. The simple Kermack-McKendrick compartmental epidemic model assumes that the sizes of the compartments are large enough that the mixing of members is homogeneous. However, at the beginning of a disease outbreak, there is a very small number of infective individuals and the transmission of infection is a stochastic event depending on the pattern of contacts between members of the population; a description should take this pattern into account.
The process to be described is known as a Galton-Watson process, and the result was first given in, pp. 241–248) and. There was a gap in the convergence proof, and the first complete proof was given much later by Steffensen. The result is a standard theorem given in many sources on branching processes, for example, but did not appear in the epidemiological literature until later. To the best of the author's knowledge, the first description in an epidemiological reference is and the first epidemiological book source is the book by in 2000.
A stochastic branching process description of the beginning of a disease outbreak begins with the assumption that there is a network of contacts of individuals, which may be described by a graph with members of the population represented by vertices and with contacts between individuals represented by edges. The study of graphs originated with the abstract theory of Erdös and Rényi of the 1950's and 1960's, and has become important more recently in many areas, including social contacts, computer networks, and many other areas as well as the spread of communicable diseases. We will think of networks as bi-directional, with disease transmission possible in either direction along an edge.
An edge is a contact between vertices that can transmit infection. The number of edges of a graph at a vertex is called the degree of the vertex. The degree distribution of a graph is , where  is the fraction of vertices having degree k. The degree distribution is fundamental in the description of the spread of disease. We assume that all contacts between an infective and a susceptible transmit infection, but this assumption can be relaxed.
We think of a small number of infectives in a population of susceptibles large enough that in the initial stage we may neglect the decrease in the susceptible population. We assume that the infectives make contacts independently of one another and let  denote the probability that the number of contacts by a randomly chosen individual is exactly k, with . In other words,  is the degree distribution of the vertices of the graph corresponding to the population network.
We define the generating function
Since , this power series converges for , and may be differentiated term by term. Thus
It is easy to verify that the generating function has the properties
The mean number of secondary infections, which we have defined as , is .
We consider a disease outbreak that begins with a single infected individual (“patient zero”) who transmits infection to every individual to whom this individual is connected, that is, along every edge of the graph from the vertex corresponding to this individual. In other words, we assume that a disease outbreak begins when a single infective transmits infection to all of the people with whom he or she is in contact. Our development via branching processes is along the lines of that of. Another approach, using a contact network perspective taken in begins with an infected edge, corresponding to a disease outbreak started by an infective individual who passes the infection on to only one contact. This approach is the one taken more commonly in studies of epidemics on networks. It is somewhat more complicated and leads to somewhat different results, although the methods are quite similar.
It is possible to prove that the probability  that the infection will die out and will not develop into a major epidemic is the limit as  of the solution of the difference equation
Thus  must be an equilibrium of this difference equation, that is, a solution of . In fact,  must be the smallest root of  .If  the equation  has only one root, namely . On the other hand, if  the equation  has a second root .
To summarize this analysis, we see that if  the probability that the infection will die out is 1, while if  there is a positive probability  that the infection will persist, and will lead to an epidemic. However, there is a positive probability  that the infection will increase initially but will produce only a minor outbreak and will die out before triggering a major epidemic. This distinction between a minor outbreak and a major epidemic, and the result that if  there may be only a minor outbreak and not a major epidemic are aspects of stochastic models not reflected in deterministic models.
One possible approach to a realistic description of an epidemic would be to use a branching process model initially and then make a transition to a compartmental model when the epidemic has become established and there are enough infectives that mass action mixing in the population is a reasonable approximation. Another approach would be to continue to use a network model throughout the course of the epidemic. It is possible to formulate this model dynamically, and the limiting case of this dynamic model as the population size becomes very large is the same as the compartmental model.
A basic description of network models may be found in. The theoretical analysis of network models is a very active and rapidly developing field. A new addition to the network epidemiology literature is. The network approach to disease modeling is a rapidly developing field of study, and there will undoubtedly be fundamental developments in our understanding of the modeling of disease transmission. Some useful references are. There has been a move to complicated network models for simulating epidemics. These assume knowledge of the mixing patterns of groups of members of the population and make predictions based on simulations of a stochastic model.
Deterministic models are not appropriate for small populations because the spread of infection is a random process. For this reason, stochastic models have an important role in disease transmission modeling. The most commonly used stochastic model is the chain binomial model of Reed and Frost, first described in lectures in 1928 by W.H. Frost but not published until much later. The Reed - Frost model was actually anticipated nearly forty years earlier by P.D. En'ko. The work of En'ko was brought to public attention much later by Karl Dietz. E.B. Wilson and M.H. Burke have given a description of Frost's 1928 lectures with a somewhat different derivation. M. Greenwood gave a somewhat different chain binomial model in 1931. The Reed-Frost model has been used widely as a basic stochastic model and many extensions have been formulated. The book by D.J. Daley and J. Gani contains an account of some of the more recent extensions. Also, a stochastic analogue of the Kermack-McKendrick epidemic model has been described in.
